REVIEW ARTICLE OPEN
Sex and gender differences and biases in arti ﬁcial intelligence
for biomedicine and healthcare
Davide Cirillo 1,10 ✉, Silvina Catuara-Solarz 2,3,10, Czuee Morey 3,4, Emre Guney 5, Laia Subirats 6,7, Simona Mellino 3,
Annalisa Gigante 3, Alfonso Valencia 1,8, María José Rementeria 1, Antonella Santuccione Chadha 3 and Nikolaos Mavridis 3,9
Precision Medicine implies a deep understanding of inter-individual differences in health and disease that are due to genetic and
environmental factors. To acquire such understanding there is a need for the implementation of different types of technologies
based on arti ﬁcial intelligence (AI) that enable the identi ﬁcation of biomedically relevant patterns, facilitating progress towards
individually tailored preventative and therapeutic interventions. Despite the signi ﬁcant scientiﬁc advances achieved so far, most of
the currently used biomedical AI technologies do not account for bias detection. Furthermore, the design of the majority of
algorithms ignore the sex and gender dimension and its contribution to health and disease differences among individuals. Failure
in accounting for these differences will generate sub-optimal results and produce mistakes as well as discriminatory outcomes. In
this review we examine the current sex and gender gaps in a subset of biomedical technologies used in relation to Precision
Medicine. In addition, we provide recommendations to optimize their utilization to improve the global health and disease
landscape and decrease inequalities.
npj Digital Medicine            (2020) 3:81 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-020-0288-5
INTRODUCTION
Precision Medicine, as opposed to the preponderant one-size- ﬁts-
all approach, attempts to ﬁnd personalized preventative and
therapeutic strategies by taking into account differences in genes,
environment and lifestyle, throughout the lifespan. The value and
impact of this approach makes Precision Medicine one of the most
promising health initiatives in our society
1.
Both biological (sex) and socio-cultural (gender) aspects (see
Supplementary Note 1 “Sex and gender ”) constitute relevant
sources of variation in a number of clinical and subclinical
conditions, affecting risk factors, prevalence, age of onset,
symptomatology manifestation, prognosis, biomarkers and treat-
ment effectiveness
2. Evidence of sex and gender differences has
been reported in chronic diseases such as diabetes, cardiovascular
disorders, neurological diseases
3, mental health disorders 4,
cancer5, autoimmunity 6, as well as physiological processes such
as brain aging 7 and sensitivity to pain 8. Moreover, differences in
lifestyle factors that are associated with sex and gender, such as
diet, physical activity, tobacco use and alcohol consumption, also
correlate with the epidemiology of diseases
9–11. Nonetheless,
there are still open questions regarding health differences across
the gender spectrum, re ﬂected by the scarcity of studies
dedicated to intersex, transgender and nonbinary individuals
12,13.
Initiatives, such as the Global Trans Research Evidence Map 14,
foster research access in this area to improve our understanding of
the effects of medical interventions on health and life quality
across the gender spectrum. Additionally, such clinical differences
are accompanied by sex and gender gaps in the use and access of
medical services and tools as well as affordability to medical
costs
15.
The study of sex and gender differences represents an
increasingly signi ﬁcant line of research 16, involving all levels of
biomedical and health sciences, from basic research to population
studies
17, and also fueling debate regarding its sociological
implications18,19. Observed sex and gender differences in health
and wellbeing are in ﬂuenced by complex links between both
biological and social-economic factors (see Fig. 1), which are often
surrounded by confounding variables such as stigma, stereotypes,
and the misrepresentation of data. Consequently, health research
and practices can be entangled with sex and gender inequalities
and biases
20.
In recent years, the social awareness of such biases has
increased and they have become even more evident with the
introduction of widespread advance in biomedical arti ﬁcial
intelligence (AI). In this regard, one could argue that AI
technologies act as a double-edged sword. On one hand,
algorithms can magnify and perpetuate existing sex and gender
inequalities if they are developed without removing biases and
confounding factors. On the other hand, they have the potential
to mitigate inequalities by effectively integrating sex and gender
differences in healthcare if designed properly. The development of
precise AI systems in healthcare will enable the differentiation of
vulnerabilities for disease and response to treatments among
individuals, while avoiding discriminatory biases.
The purpose of this review is to highlight the main available
biomedical data types and the role of several AI technologies to
understand sex and gender differences in health and disease. We
address their existing and potential biases and their contribution
to create personalized therapeutic interventions. We examine the
sex and gender issues involved with the generation and collection
1Barcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC), C/ Jordi Girona, 29, 08034 Barcelona, Spain. 2Telefonica Innovation Alpha Health, Torre Telefonica, Plaça d ’Ernest Lluch i Martin, 5,
08019 Barcelona, Spain. 3The Women ’s Brain Project (WBP), Guntershausen, Switzerland. 4Wega Informatik AG, Aeschengraben 20, CH-4051 Basel, Switzerland. 5Research
Programme on Biomedical Informatics (GRIB), Hospital del Mar Research Institute and Pompeu Fabra University, Dr. Aiguader, 88, 08003 Barcelona, Sp ain. 6Eurecat - Centre
Tecnològic de Catalunya, C/ Bilbao, 72, Edi ﬁci A, 08005 Barcelona, Spain. 7eHealth Center, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, Rambla del Poblenou, 156, 08018 Barcelona, Spain.
8ICREA, Pg. Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain. 9Interactive Robots and Media Laboratory (IRML), Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. 10These authors contributed equally:
Davide Cirillo, Silvina Catuara-Solarz. ✉email: davide.cirillo@bsc.es
www.nature.com/npjdigitalmed
Scripps Research Translational Institute
1234567890():,;
of experimental, clinical and digital data. Furthermore, we review a
number of technologies to analyze and deploy this data, namely
Big Data Analytics, Natural Language Processing and Robotics.
Those technologies are becoming increasingly relevant for
Precision Medicine while being exposed to potential sex and
gender biases. In addition, we surveyed Explainable AI and
algorithmic Fairness, which ensure the trustworthy delivery of AI
solutions that can account for sex and gender differences in the
patient’s wellbeing. Finally, we provide a summary to incorporate
the sex and gender dimension into biomedical research and AI
technologies to accelerate the developments that will enable the
creation of effective strategies to augment populations ’ health
and wellbeing.
Desirable vs. undesirable biases
Despite the fact that the term “bias” has gained a negative
connotation due to its association to unfair prejudice, the
differential consideration and treatment to speci ﬁc biomedical
aspects is a necessary course of action in the context of Precision
Medicine. Therefore, here we de ﬁned two main categories of sex
and gender biases: desirable and undesirable (see Fig. 2). The
difference between them is found in the impact that these biases
have on the patients ’ wellbeing and healthcare access.
A desirable bias implies taking into account sex and gender
differences to make a precise diagnosis and recommend a tailored
and more effective treatment for each individual. This represents a
much more accurate approach than collapsing all sex and gender
categories into a single one, such as data generated from mixed
sex or gender cohorts
16. Table 1 reports illustrative examples of
clinical conditions and biomedical techniques in which desirable
biases would be bene ﬁcial for both basic and clinical research as
well as diagnosis and treatment.
Conversely, an undesirable bias is that which exhibits unin-
tended or unnecessary sex and gender discrimination. This occurs
when claims are made in relation with sex or gender and medical
conditions despite the lack of exhaustive evidence to support
them or based on skewed evidence.
For instance epidemiological studies indicate that there is a
higher prevalence of depression among women, however, this
may result from a skewed diagnosis due to clinical scales of
depression measuring symptoms that occur more frequently
among women 21. Another source of undesirable bias is the
misrepresentation of the target population, leaving minorities out.
An example of this is the case of the insuf ﬁcient representation of
pregnant women in psychiatric research 22.
There are multiple sources of undesirable biases that could
accidentally be introduced in AI algorithms 23 (see Table 2). The
most common one is the lack of a representative sample of the
population in the training dataset. In some cases, a bias may exist
in the overall population as a consequence of underlying social,
historical or institutional reasons. In other cases, an algorithm
itself, and not the training dataset, can introduce bias by
obscuring an inherent discrimination or inducing an unreasoned
or irrelevant selectivity.
SOURCES AND TYPES OF HEALTH DATA
Experimental and clinical data
In the early days of biomedical research and drug discovery, sex-
speciﬁc biological differences were neglected and both experi-
mental and clinical studies were fundamentally focused on male
experimental models or male subjects
24. Even nowadays, male
mouse models are overall more represented than female models
in basic, preclinical, and surgical biomedical research
25. A recent
analysis of data on 234 phenotypic traits from almost 55,000 mice
showed that existing ﬁndings were in ﬂuenced by sex 26. The lack
of representation of female models and patients is partly due to
technical and bioethical considerations, such as the attempt to
reduce the impact of estrous cycle in experimental studies and
protective policies for women of childbearing age in clinical
research. Consequently, some of the treatments that currently
exist for several diseases are not adequately evaluated in
women
27,28 who are likely to be underrepresented in clinical
trials29,30, especially in Phases I and II 31,32.
Differences in the physiology of sexes 33 might translate into
clinically relevant differences in pharmacokinetics and pharmaco-
dynamics of drugs. These differences, taken together with the
underrepresentation of women in clinical trials, can explain why
women typically report more adverse event reactions compared
with men
34. An illustrative example of the discrepancy between
sexes in clinical trials is zolpidem, a sleep medication 35, which
shows slower drug metabolization and high secondary effects in
women, increasing their health risks compared with men
34,36,37.I n
2013, the FDA recommended a weight-based dosing zolpidem for
women due to potential sex-speci ﬁc impairments 38, proving how
a strati ﬁed consideration of sexes enables a better understanding
of differential drug toxicity. The design of preclinical and clinical
Fig. 1 The key determinants of health. Health and wellbeing of individuals and communities are in ﬂuenced by several factors, which include
the person ’s individual characteristics and behaviours and the socio-economic, and physical environment, according to the World Health
Organization (WHO) ( www.who.int/hia/evidence/doh/en/). Sex and gender differences interact with the whole spectrum of health
determinants.
D. Cirillo et al.
2
npj Digital Medicine (2020)    81 Scripps Research Translational Institute
1234567890():,;
studies should have a sex and gender-based approach in order to
reduce the time to translate research into clinical practice, as well
as to understand and implement precise pharmacological
guidelines
39.
Accounting for sex and gender differences leads to a better
understanding of the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic
action of a drug. It also carries substantial economic implications
40
as conducting studies on large population-based trials is generally
more expensive
41, and often requires post-trial analyses to identify
and categorise the factors that explain the varying drug response
across individuals.
In summary, although there is a signi ﬁcant gap between two
sexes on the availability of clinical data and the knowledge on the
effects of drugs, recent clinical guidelines and initiatives hint to a
fairer landscape that accounts for sex differences in biomedical
research and clinical practice.
Digital biomarkers
Digital biomarkers are physiological, psychological and behavioral
indicators based on data including human-computer interaction
(e.g. swipes, taps, and typing), physical activity (e.g. gait, dexterity)
and voice variations, collected by portable, wearable, implantable
or even ingestible devices
42. They can facilitate the diagnosis of a
condition, the assessment of the effects of a treatment and the
predicted prognosis for a particular patient. In addition, some
digital biomarkers can inform on patient adherence to treatment.
There are many digital biomarkers that are currently being
developed or already approved or cleared by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) for use cases such as risk detection,
diagnosis, and monitoring of symptoms and endpoints in clinical
trials
42 (see Table 3).
A particular therapeutic area where digital biomarkers are
becoming bene ﬁcial is that of neurological and mental health
disorders. Since digital devices can acquire health related data in
real-time, they can enable a continuous monitoring of an
individual’s health parameters in a cost-effective way that is more
granular, ecological and objective than the currently clinically
used self-reports, questionnaires or psychometric tests. Digital
biomarkers are becoming especially relevant for those clinical
conditions where small ﬂuctuations in daily symptoms or
performance are clinically meaningful. This is the case, for
example, of early detection of neurodegenerative disorders such
as Alzheimer ’s disease (AD), in which key indices of preclinical
stages are cognitive, motor and sensory changes that occur 10 or
15 years prior to its effective diagnosis
43,44.
Despite the progress that has been made on digital biomarkers
in the last years, sex and gender differences in these indices of
health and disease have not been examined yet. Considering that
several studies have shown that there are signi ﬁcant sex
differences on neurodegenerative, physiological and cognitive
aspects during the preclinical stages of AD
45, it is reasonable to
expect that further sex differences will be found in the digital
biomarkers for this and other clinical conditions.
In some cases the analysis of sex differences on digital
biomarkers is prevented by undesired biases in the datasets used
by the models that provide the health indicators. For instance,
current studies that test digital biomarkers are often performed
with small sample sizes in the range of tens to hundreds of
subjects and tend to show insuf ﬁcient demographic information
on sex and gender
46. For example, in a study assessing digital
biomarkers for Parkinson ’s disease (PD), only 18.6% were
women47. As a consequence, if an algorithm is trained with a
dataset overrepresented by male patients, it may lead to a more
accurate detection of those symptoms that are more frequently
manifested by male PD patients (rigidity and rapid-eye move-
ment) in comparison to those symptoms that are more frequently
manifested by female PD patients (dyskinesias and depression)
48.
In other cases, the undesired biases arise from the digital device
itself, such as in the case of a pulse oximetry which showed errors
in the predicted arterial oxyhemoglobin saturation associated with
sex and skin colour of the subjects
49.
An additional source of undesired biases in digital biomarkers is
the unbalanced access, and use of digital devices among people
Fig. 2 Desirable and undesirable biases in arti ﬁcial intelligence for health. Fair data generation and explainable algorithms are
fundamental requirements for the design and application of arti ﬁcial intelligence to optimize for health and wellbeing across the sex and
gender spectrum. This will facilitate the reduction of undesirable biases that propagate inequity and discrimination, and will promote
desirable differentiations that help develop Precision Medicine.
D. Cirillo et al.
3
Scripps Research Translational Institute npj Digital Medicine (2020)    81
with different sexes and genders as well as education and income
levels and age 50. In fact, in low and middle income countries,
women are 10% less likely to own smartphones (see Fig. 3) and
26% less likely to use the internet compared with men, and 1.2
billion women do not even have access to mobile internet 51. This
creates uneven datasets that promote misrepresentation of digital
biomarkers. Awareness and efforts into the identi ﬁcation of sex
and gender differences in digital biomarkers will lead to more
accurate indicators for prevention and diagnosis of disease, as well
as more effective treatment monitoring.
TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE ANALYSIS AND DEPLOYMENT OF
HEALTH DATA
Big Data analytics
Big Data analytics is a body of techniques and tools to collect,
organize and examine large amounts of data. Common Big Data
analytics processes and approaches include the creation of data
management infrastructures and the application of data-driven
algorithms and AI solutions
52. Biomedical and clinical Big Data
have the potential of providing deeper insights into health and
disease at an unprecedented scale. Moreover, the availability of
longitudinal health Big Data enables the characterization of the
transitions between health and disease states as well as their
similarities and differences among sexes and genders. Large
international research infrastructures, such as ELIXIR
53 and NIH Big
Data to Knowledge (BD2K) 54, provide robust, long-term sustain-
able biomedical resources that will enable identifying differential
patterns for health and disease transitions including the sex and
gender dimension.
For instance, data from GWAS targeting smoking behaviour
have shown sex-associated genetic differences that in ﬂuence
smoking initiation and maintenance 55. Interestingly, these differ-
ences complement the differential effectiveness of tobacco
control initiatives based on the sex of the individuals that receive
the preventative messages
56. Similarly, genomic studies in large
human cohorts revealed chromosomal factors related to sex
differences in excess body fat accumulation 57, interlinking recent
insights on obesity from different Big Data types such as social
media, retail sales, commercial data, geolocalization, transport and
digital devices 58.
Big Data analytics focused on health under the sex and gender
lens are carried out worldwide by several initiatives such as Data2x
(www.data2x.org). This collaborative platform explores female
wellbeing through statistical analysis of data covering demogra-
phy, education, health, geolocation, in order to map indices
disaggregated by gender.
For instance, signi ﬁcant sex differences in behavioral and social
patterns related with communication such as the number and
duration of phone calls and the degree of social networking callers
have been observed
59. Furthermore, quantitative analysis into sex
and cultural differences uncovered associations with mental
health and social networks
60, showing men express higher
negativity and lower desire of social support on social media
compared with women.
Awareness of sex and gender differences through biomedical
Big Data could lead to a better risk strati ﬁcation. For example, a
query of sex and gender differences in heart diseases revealed
that in women enhanced parasympathetic and decreased
sympathetic tones appear to be greater and also defensive during
cardiac stress
61, while key reproductive factors associated with
coronary heart disease only modestly improve risk prediction 62.
The caveat of these resources is that the exploitation of their
biomedical Big Data can magnify existing undesirable biases, for
instance by introducing inferential errors due to sampling,
measurement, multiple comparison, aggregation, and systematic
exclusion of information 63. For example, biases may be introduced
in clinical decision support algorithms that rely on data obtained
from the large reservoirs of electronic health records (EHRs), which
may display missing data, unbalanced representation, and implicit
selectivity in patient factors such as sex and gender
24.
In agreement with the Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability,
and Reusability (FAIR) recommendations for responsible research
and gender equality 64, biomedical Big Data requires innovative
procedures for bias corrections 65, including sex and gender bias,
as well as algorithm interpretability 66 (see Valuable outputs of
Table 1. Illustrative examples of clinical conditions and studies in which desirable biases would be bene ﬁcial for both basic and clinical research as
well as diagnosis and treatment.
Clinical conditions and studies Current status without the desirable bias Utility of the desirable bias
Autistic spectrum disorder There is a current lack of consideration of the
demonstrated age-dependent sex differences in the
symptomatology related with impairments in social
communication and interaction, expressive behaviour,
reciprocal conversation, non-verbal gestures for diagnostic
purposes
123.
Differential diagnostic criteria for males and females
could facilitate the identi ﬁcation of the clinical diagnosis
leading to appropriate treatment.
Cardiovascular disorders Although it has been documented that men and women
respond differently to many cardiovascular medications
such as statins, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
and β-Blockers among others, adopted treatments do not
consider sex differences
124.
Making prescriptions according to the sex of the patient
could lead to improved health bene ﬁts.
Despite the fact that Coronary heart disease (CHD) is the
leading cause of death among women 125, the majority
(67%) of patients enroled in clinical trials for cardiovascular
devices are male
126.
The application of a desirable bias towards women
would lead to a more accurate representation of sex
differences in clinical research.
Genome-wide association
studies (GWAS)
Most of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) focus on
white male subjects
127 and those that explore sex
differences in complex traits are scarce 128.
The introduction of desirable biases to deliberately
include female subjects and other ethnicities in GWAS
could lead to better account for potential sex
differences in disease that are currently unknown
because of being overlooked.
Human immunode ﬁciency
virus (HIV)
The observed lower female representation in HIV clinical
trials depends, among other factors, from the
disadvantaged awareness about treatment and enrolment
options compared with men
129– 131.
Promoting empowerment initiatives in those patients
with disadvantages will increase their exposure to
treatment options and clinical trial enrolment.
D. Cirillo et al.
4
npj Digital Medicine (2020)    81 Scripps Research Translational Institute
health data), facing mounting pressure in data processing and
privacy with the pursuit of “equal opportunity by design ”67. Fair
big data analytics will facilitate the identi ﬁcation of sex and
gender differences in health as well as accurate indicators for
prevention and diagnosis, and effective treatment.
Natural Language Processing
Natural Language Processing (NLP) consists of computational
systems aimed at understanding and manipulating written and
spoken human language for purposes like machine translation,
speech recognition and conversational interfaces
68.
In relation to biomedical research, NLP techniques allow
processing of voice recordings and transcripts as well as large
volumes of scienti ﬁc knowledge accumulated in the textual forms,
such as biomedical literature, electronic medical records, clinical
trials and pathology reports. This automatic processing enables,
for instance, the creation of major knowledge bases such as NDEx
(https://home.ndexbio.org/), OncoKB ( https://oncokb.org), and
Literome69.
As for Precision Medicine, these technologies allow to make
predictions that can contribute to clinical decisions, such as
diagnosis, prognosis, risk of relapse, and symptomatology
ﬂuctuations in response to treatments. Examples of applications
of NLP to Precision Medicine comprise the identi ﬁcation of
personalised drug combinations
70, the knowledge-based curation
of clinical signi ﬁcance of variants 71, and patient trajectory
modelling from clinical notes 72. Activities to overcome some of
the main challenges in NLP, such as complex semantics extraction
and reasoning, entail automated curation efforts, such as
Microsoft Project Hanover ( https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/
research/project/project-hanover/), and evaluation campaigns,
such as BioCreative
73.
The sex and gender dimension is crucial for the development of
effective NLP solutions for health since multiple sex and gender
differences have been documented in written and spoken
language
74. In fact, major differences are observed in dialogue
structure75, word reading 76, and even in children ’s linguistic
tasks77. Although the reasons for the differential use of language
between men and women needs further investigations 78, the
existence of such differences can either facilitate or complicate the
development of NLP technologies. For instance, while it is possible
to accurately categorize texts based on the author ’s gender 79,
performances of sentiment analysis of male- and female-authored
texts are extremely variable 80 and potentially biased 81. Thus,
knowing the sex and gender of the author enables a better
targeted prediction of symptoms conveyed through natural
language (text or speech). An example of this is the case of
personalised healthcare for transgender and gender nonconform-
ing patients based on EHRs analysis
82.
In the context of NLP for voice recognition, the relevance of sex
differences is evident in applications such as the prediction of
suicidal behaviour 83, especially considering the reported incon-
sistent and incomplete responses by popular conversational
agents (Apple, Samsung, Microsoft) to suicidal ideation 84.
A case of undesirable biases in NLP is the use of text corpora
containing imprints of documented human stereotypes that can
propagate into AI systems 85. For instance, dense vector repre-
sentations called word embeddings 86 are able to capture semantic
relationships between words, such as sex, gender and ethnic
relationships87, thus absorbing biases existing in the training
corpus88. Methods for bias mitigation in NLP have been recently
reviewed, including learning gender-neutral embeddings and
tagging the data points to preserve the gender of the source 89.
A ﬂourishing area of NLP is that of medical chatbots, aiming to
improve users ’wellbeing through real-time symptom assessment
and recommendation interfaces. A dialogue of a chatbot can be
modelled with available metadata to adjust to features of the
replier in terms of gender, age, and mood
90. In the context of
mental health, medical chatbots include Woebot, which proved to
relieve feelings of anxiety and depression 91, and Moodkit, which
recommends chatting and journaling activities through text and
voice notes 92. Although both proved to be effective in clinical
trials, the lack of data on their long-term effects is raising certain
concerns. These include the risk of oversimplifying mental
conditions and therapeutic approaches, without considering
potentially important factors such as sex and gender differences
in non-verbal communication.
Of note, affective computing (i.e. passively estimating human
emotional states in real-time) has started to be integrated in
automated systems for educational and marketing purposes
93,a s
well as voice-activated assistants for mental health support like
Mindscape ( www.cultmindscape.com). In this regard, potential
undesirable biases may undermine the automatic detection of
sex-associated speech ﬂuctuation in cognitive impairment
94.
Table 2. Source of undesirable bias in Arti ﬁcial Intelligence with examples in health research and practice.
Source of bias in arti ﬁcial intelligence Description
Historical bias Arises even if the data is perfectly measured and sampled, when the world as it is leads a model to produce
outcomes that are not desired. e.g. incorrectly assuming that HIV is inherently linked to homosexual and
bisexual men as its prevalence is higher in this population
132.
Representation bias Occurs when certain parts of the input space are underrepresented. e.g. European male populations are the
primary focus in genomics research and its derived clinical ﬁndings, neglecting other ethnicities and
populations133.
Measurement bias Occurs when measured data are often proxies for some ideal features and labels. e.g. the use of clinical, social,
and cognitive variables to detect the prodromal phase in schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders
despite of observed sex differences in the expression of those symptoms and their associated risk for
psychosis
134.
Aggregation bias Arises when a one-size- ﬁts-all model is used for groups with different conditional distributions. e.g., for the
diagnosis and monitoring of diabetes, haemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) levels are routinely used, despite of
differences associated with ethnicities
135 and gender 136.
Evaluation bias Occurs when the evaluation and/or benchmark data for an algorithm does not represent the target
population. e.g. underperformance of commercial facial recognition algorithm in dark-skinned female faces
as most benchmark face image datasets come from white men
137.
Algorithmic Bias Occurs when bias is introduced in the algorithm consciously or unconsciously in ad-hoc solutions. e.g. by
using health care cost as a proxy feature for health status without correcting for existing inequalities in health
access, a commercial algorithm to predict health care needs was found to exhibit signi ﬁcant racial
discrimination138.
D. Cirillo et al.
5
Scripps Research Translational Institute npj Digital Medicine (2020)    81
In the development and application of biomedical NLP systems,
awareness of sex and gender differences is a crucial step in our
understanding of women ’s and men ’s relative use of language,
which could lead to a better patient management and more
effective risk strati ﬁcation.
Robotics
Robots can serve a diverse range of roles in improving a human ’s
tasks, health and quality of life. In the context of Precision
Medicine robots are expected to provide personalised assistance
to patients according to their speci ﬁc needs and preferences, at
the right time and in the right way. Robotics for health are
becoming increasingly impactful, in particular in neurology
95,
rehabilitation96, and assistive approaches for improving the
quality of life of patients and caregivers 97.
In a personalised robot-patient interaction both the gender of
the patient and the “gender” of the robot have to be taken into
account. While there is not a lot of research on how to personalise
the behaviour of a robot (e.g. speech style) to an individual ’s
gender, several studies explored how the gendered appearance of
a robot differentially affects human-robot interactions. For
instance, a recent study revealed sex differences in how children
interact with robots
98 with implications for their use in paediatric
hospitalization99.
The application of robots in human society makes the
discussion on humanoids ’ gender extremely relevant and
signiﬁcantly variable across cultures 100,101. While some robots
are genderless, such as Pepper (Softbank), ASIMO (Honda), and
Ripley (MIT), others are designed to display explicit gendered
features, such as the females Sophia (Hanson Robotics), Sarah the
FaceBot
102, and male Ibn Sina Robot, a culture-speci ﬁc historical
humanoid103. This opened a strong debate regarding the
commonalities among humans and robots on physical, socio-
logical and psychological gender
104.
It has been demonstrated that the outcome of a humanoid
robot’s task can be affected by its gender, as in the case of female
charity robots receiving more donations from men in comparison
to women
100. Indeed, the fact that the traits of a gendered robot
are developed in accordance with the perceived gender role of
both the developer and the ﬁnal user, could emphasize social
constructs and stereotypes. Gender representation in robots
should evade social stereotypes and serve functionally human-
robot interactions
102. An illustrative effort towards gender
neutrality in robotics is the creation of a genderless digital voice
(https://www.genderlessvoice.com/), designed using a gender-
neutral frequency range (145 –175 Hz).
Awareness of sex and gender differences in patients and in
robots could lead to a better healthcare assistance and effective
human-machine interactions for biomedical applications as well as
a better translation of ethical decision-making into machines
105.
Table 3. Categories of digital biomarkers.
Category De ﬁnition Corresponding digital biomarker examples
Susceptibility and risk
biomarker
A biomarker that indicates the potential for developing a
disease or medical condition in an individual who does not
currently have clinically apparent disease or medical
condition.
aDetect cognitive changes in healthy subjects at risk of
developing Alzheimer ’s disease using a video game
platform139.
Diagnostic biomarker A biomarker used to detect or con ﬁrm the presence of a
disease or condition of interest or to identify individuals with
a subtype of the disease.
aDiagnose ADHD in children using eye vergence
metrics140.
aDetect depression and Parkinson ’s disease using vocal
biomarkers141.
aDiagnose asthma and respiratory infections using
smartphone-recorded cough sounds 142.
Monitoring biomarker A biomarker measured serially for assessing the status of a
disease or medical condition or for evidence of exposure to
(or effect of ) a medical product or an environmental agent.
aQuantify Parkinson’s disease severity using smartphones
and machine learning 143.
bTrack time and location of short-acting beta-agonist
inhaler use through an attached wireless sensor 144.
aDetection of nocturnal scratching movements in patients
with atopic dermatitis using accelerometers and recurrent
neural networks
145.
bMeasurements of sympathetic nervous impulses at the
skin and inference of parasympathetic activity from heart
rate variation to detect tonic-clonic epileptic seizures and
immediately alert care providers 146.
bPortable electrocardiogram sensor associated to a
smartphone app to monitor atrial ﬁbrillation, bradycardia,
tachycardia or normal heart rhythm and inform the
clinician
147.
aMeasure adherence in treatment of schizophrenia and
bipolar disorder with an ingestible digital pill 148.
Endpoint digital
biomarkers in
clinical trials
Endpoints generated by the use of mobile technologies in
clinical setting.
aAccelerometer-derived motor abnormalities for use in
Parkinson’s disease 47.
bMonitoring of multiple sclerosis patients with digital
technologies by using active and passive tests
(ClinicalTrials.gov Identiﬁers: NCT03523858; NCT02952911)
bVirtual Reality Functional Capacity Assessment Tool as
co-primary and secondary endpoint in schizophrenia and
major depressive disorder 139.
aDigital biomarker under development (in feasibility/exploratory stages).
bDigital biomarker in use in a clinical trial or an FDA cleared/approved digital health product, or a digital health app in use not requiring approval.
D. Cirillo et al.
6
npj Digital Medicine (2020)    81 Scripps Research Translational Institute
VALUABLE OUTPUTS OF HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES
Towards explainable arti ﬁcial intelligence
In the context of Precision Medicine, the expected outputs of AI
models consist of predictions of risk and diagnosis of medical
conditions or recommendations of treatments, with profound
inﬂuence in people ’s lives and health.
Despite the progress of AI models in recent years, the
complexity of their internal structures has led to a major
technological issue termed the ‘Black box ’ problem. It refers to
the lack of explicit declarative knowledge representations in
machine learning models
106, meaning their inability to provide a
layman-understandable explanation and/or interpretation to
respond to “how” or “why” questions regarding their output.
Getting an explicable justi ﬁcation of how and why these AI
models reach their conclusions is now becoming more and more
crucial since there is an increasing need to understand the speci ﬁc
parameters used to draw clinical conclusions with relevant impact
on patients ’lives. Indeed, the EU directive 2016/680 General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) states the “right to an explanation ”
about the output of an algorithm
107.
In regards to the scope of this review, explainability in AI would
help justify algorithms ’clinical predictions and recommendations
when they are differential for patients with different sex and
genders. On one hand, an explanation of the decisional process
would enable to ﬁnd potential mistaken conclusions derived by
training an algorithm with misrepresented data. This will facilitate
the identi ﬁcation of undesirable biases generally found in clinical
data with unbalanced sex and gender representation. On the
other hand, an explanation of the decisional processes will help
the discovery of sex and gender differences in clinical data that is
representative, therefore promoting the desired biases for
personalised preventative and therapeutic interventions.
Different features such as interpretability and completeness
(see Supplementary Note 2 “Explainable Arti ﬁcial Intelligence ”)i n
AI have been established as explainability requirements to
contribute to relevant aspects of general medicine such as
conﬁdence, safety, security, privacy, ethics, fairness and trust.
The term explainable arti ﬁcial intelligence (XAI) is used to refer
to algorithms that are able to meet those requirements. XAI is a
relatively young ﬁeld of research and their applications so far have
not been particularly involved with sex and gender differences.
An example of XAI is a recent study where a machine learning
algorithm made referral recommendations on dozens of retinal
diseases, highlighting the speci ﬁc structures in optical tomogra-
phy scans that could lead to ambiguous interpretation
108. Another
example is a deep learning model for predicting cardiovascular
risk factors based on images of the retina, indicating which
anatomical features, such as the optic disc or blood vessels, were
used to generate the predictions
109. XAI is also useful in basic
research, for instance, efforts in creating “visible” deep neural
networks that provide automatic explanations of the impact of a
genotypic change on cellular phenotypic states
110.
XAI represents a promising technology to assist in the
identiﬁcation of sex and gender differences in health and disease,
and to dissociate the underlying sources from biased datasets or
social inequalities.
Bias detection frameworks for fairness
One of the main challenges to develop trustworthy AI is to de ﬁne
the meaning of fairness in the practice of machine learning
111.
Indeed, many approaches have been proposed to achieve fair
algorithmic decision-making, some of which not always meet the
expected outcome.
For instance, a widely used approach to ensure fairness in data
processing is to remove some sensitive information, such as sex or
gender, and all other possible correlated features
112. However, if
inherent differences exist in the underlying population, such as
sex differences in disease prevalence, this procedure is undesir-
able as the outcome would be less fair towards speci ﬁc minorities.
Indeed, the learned patterns that apply to the majority group
might be invalid for a minority one.
On the contrary, the explicit use of sex and gender information
enables to reach an outcome that is fairer towards minorities,
which is a desirable procedure when inherent differences exist. A
theoretical implementation of such approach, also called fair
afﬁrmative action, has been proposed as an optimisation problem
to obtain, at the same time, both group fairness (a.k.a statistical
parity) and individual fairness
113.
Although af ﬁrmative action represents a remedy for unfair
algorithmic discrimination, ensuring the quality of the data used
for algorithm training is also crucial. For instance, a study found
that only 17% of cardiologists correctly identi ﬁed women as
having greater risk for heart disease than men 114. Indeed,
physicians are typically trained to recognise patterns of angina
and myocardial infarction that occur more frequently in men,
resulting in women being typically under-diagnosed for coronary
artery disease
115. Consequently, training an algorithm on available
data on diagnosed cases could be in ﬂuenced by an implicit sex
and gender bias.
Fairness is highly context-speci ﬁc and requires an under-
standing of the classi ﬁcation task and possible minorities.
Awareness and deep knowledge of sex and gender differences
as well as the related socio-economical aspects and possible
confounding factors are of paramount importance to establish
fairness in algorithmic development.
The development and application of fair approaches will be
critical for the implementation of unbiased and interpretable
models for Precision Medicine
106,116. In this regard, the use of
visualizations, logical statements, and dimensionality reduction
techniques can be implemented in computational tools to achieve
interpretability23.
Fig. 3 The digital divide in access to mobile technology around
the globe. The bar plot reports how less likely a woman is to own a
mobile phone than a man, according to a survey analysis on mobile
ownership conducted by the Global System for Mobile Commu-
nications Association (GSMA) in low- and middle-income countries
(LMIC) in 2019, by geographical area (source: GSMA “The Mobile
Gender Gap Report 2020 ”
51). For instance, in South Asia women are
23% less likely than men to be the owner of a mobile phone, while
in Europe and Central Asia women are 1% more likely to be the
owner of a mobile phone. Across LMICs ( “Overall”), women are 8%
less likely than men to own a mobile phone.
D. Cirillo et al.
7
Scripps Research Translational Institute npj Digital Medicine (2020)    81
Mitigating undesirable bias to achieve fairness might require an
explicit instruction to the arti ﬁcial learning engine including rules
of appropriate conduct, as proposed in the domain of cognitive
robotics117. In addition, caution should be used particularly with
the unsupervised learning components of AI given the wide
availability of biased data sets and self-learning algorithms. Recent
developments in bias detection and mitigation also include
methods such as adopting re-sampling
118, adversarial learning 119,
and open-source toolkits such as IBM AI Fairness 360 (AIF360)
(aif360.mybluemix.net) and Aequitas (dsapp.uchicago.edu/pro-
jects/aequitas).
DISCUSSION
Technological advances in machine learning and AI are transform-
ing our health systems, societies, and daily lives
120. In the context
of biomedicine, such systems can sometimes either neglect
desired differentiations, such as sex and gender, or amplify
undesired ones, such as reinforcing existing socio-cultural
discriminations that promote inequalities.
The ambitious goals set by Precision Medicine will be achieved
using the latest advances in AI to properly identify the role of
inter-individual differences. This will include the impact of sex and
gender in health and disease, as well as eradicating existing
undesirable sex and gender biases from data sets, algorithms and
experimental design. The proper use of innovative technologies
will pave the way towards tailored and personalised disease
prevention and treatment, accounting for sex and gender
differences and extending towards generalized wellbeing. Actions
that foster the effective utilization of AI systems will not only
enable the acceleration towards Precision Medicine, but most
importantly, will signi ﬁcantly contribute to the improvement of
the quality of life of patients of all sexes and genders.
Ethical standards will have to continue to be considered by
governments and regulatory organisations to guarantee the
preservation of personal data privacy and security as well as to
determine the way new technological tools should be employed,
data should be collected, and models improved
121,122. Govern-
ments and regulatory organisations are establishing the guide-
lines for actions in this direction, such as the case of AI-WATCH
(https://ec.europa.eu/knowledge4policy/ai-watch), an initiative of
the European Commission to monitor the socio-economic, legal
and ethical impact of AI and robotics.
Based on the information surveyed in this work, we provide the
following recommendations to ensure that sex and gender
differences in health and disease are accounted for in AI
implementations that inform Precision Medicine:
1. Distinguish between desirable and undesirable biases and
guarantee the representation of desirable biases in AI
development (see Introduction: Desirable vs. Undesirable
biases).
2. Increase awareness of unintended biases in the scienti ﬁc
community, technology industry, among policy makers, and
the general public (see Sources and types of Health data
and Technologies for the analysis and deployment of
Health data).
3. Implement explainable algorithms, which not only provide
understandable explanations for the layperson, but which
could also be equipped with integrated bias detection
systems and mitigation strategies, and validated with
appropriate benchmarking (see Valuable outputs of Health
technologies).
4. Incorporate key ethical considerations during every stage of
technological development, ensuring that the systems
maximize wellbeing and health of the population (see
Discussion).
DATA AVAILABILITY
No datasets were generated or analyzed during the current study.
Received: 18 July 2019; Accepted: 28 April 2020;
REFERENCES
1. Ginsburg, G. S. & Phillips, K. A. Precision Medicine: from science to value. Health
Aff. 37, 694 –701 (2018).
2. Regitz-Zagrosek, V. Sex and gender differences in health. Science & society
series on sex and science. EMBO Rep. 13, 596 –603 (2012).
3. Ferretti, M. T. et al. Sex differences in Alzheimer disease - the gateway to pre-
cision medicine. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 14, 457 –469 (2018).
4. Kuehner, C. Why is depression more common among women than among men?
Lancet Psychiatry 4, 146 –158 (2017).
5. Kim, H.-I., Lim, H. & Moon, A. Sex differences in cancer: epidemiology, genetics
and therapy. Biomol. Ther. 26, 335 –342 (2018).
6. Natri, H., Garcia, A. R., Buetow, K. H., Trumble, B. C. & Wilson, M. A. The pregnancy
pickle: evolved immune compensation due to pregnancy underlies sex differ-
ences in human diseases. Trends Genet. 35, 478 –488 (2019).
7. Guggenmos, M. et al. Quantitative neurobiological evidence for accelerated
brain aging in alcohol dependence. Transl. Psychiatry 7, 1279 (2017).
8. Dance, A. Why the sexes don ’t feel pain the same way. Nature 567, 448 (2019).
9. Linn, L., Oliel, S. & Baldwin, A. Women and men face different chronic disease risks.
PAHO/WHO. https://www.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_content&view=
article&id=5080:2011-women-men-face-different-chronic-disease-risks&Itemid=
135&lang=en (2011).
10. Varì, R. et al. Gender-related differences in lifestyle may affect health status. Ann.
DellIstituto Super. Sanità . https://doi.org/10.4415/ANN_16_02_06 (2016).
11. Torres-Rojas, C. & Jones, B. C. Sex differences in neurotoxicogenetics. Front.
Genet. 9, 196 (2018).
12. Jones, T. Intersex studies: a systematic review of international health literature.
SAGE Open 8, 215824401774557 (2018).
13. Scandurra, C. et al. Health of non-binary and genderqueer people: a systematic
review. Front. Psychol. 10, 1453 (2019).
14. Marshall, Z. et al. Documenting research with transgender, nonbinary, and other
gender diverse (Trans) individuals and communities: introducing the global
trans research evidence map. Transgender Health 4,6 8 –80 (2019).
15. Ensuring the Health Care Needs of Women: A Checklist for Health Exchanges.
The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation . https://www.kff.org/womens-health-
policy/issue-brief/ensuring-the-health-care-needs-of-women-a-checklist-for-
health-exchanges/ (2013).
16. Shansky, R. M. Are hormones a “female problem ” for animal research? Science
364, 825 –826 (2019).
17. Rich-Edwards, J. W., Kaiser, U. B., Chen, G. L., Manson, J. E. & Goldstein, J. M. Sex
and gender differences research design for basic, clinical, and population stu-
dies: essentials for investigators. Endocr. Rev. 39, 424 –439 (2018).
18. Eliot, L. Neurosexism: the myth that men and women have different brains.
Nature 566, 453 –454 (2019).
19. Ferretti, M. T., Santuccione-Chadha, A. & Hampel, H. Account for sex in brain
research for precision medicine. Nature 569,4 0 –40 (2019).
20. Hay, K. et al. Disrupting gender norms in health systems: making the case for
change. Lancet S0140673619306488. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(19)
30648-8 (2019).
21. Martin, L. A., Neighbors, H. W. & Grif ﬁth, D. M. The experience of symptoms of
depression in men vs women: analysis of the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication. JAMA Psychiatry 70, 1100 –1106 (2013).
22. Mental health aspects of women ’s reproductive health: a global review of the
literature. (World Health Organization, 2009).
23. Tjoa, E. & Guan, C. A survey on explainable arti ﬁcial intelligence (XAI): towards
medical XAI. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.07374 (2019).
24. McGregor, A. J. et al. How to study the impact of sex and gender in medical
research: a review of resources. Biol. Sex. Differ. 7, 46 (2016).
25. Yoon, D. Y. et al. Sex bias exists in basic science and translational surgical
research. Surgery 156, 508 –516 (2014).
26. Karp, N. A. et al. Prevalence of sexual dimorphism in mammalian phenotypic
traits. Nat. Commun. 8, 15475 (2017).
27. Holdcroft, A. Gender bias in research: how does it affect evidence based
medicine? J. R. Soc. Med. 100,2 –3 (2007).
28. Clayton, J. A. Studying both sexes: a guiding principle for biomedicine. FASEB J.
30, 519 –524 (2016).
D. Cirillo et al.
8
npj Digital Medicine (2020)    81 Scripps Research Translational Institute
29. Melloni, C. et al. Representation of women in randomized clinical trials of car-
diovascular disease prevention. Circ. Cardiovasc. Qual. Outcomes 3, 135 –142
(2010).
30. Geller, S. E. et al. The More Things Change, the More They Stay the Same: A
Study to Evaluate Compliance With Inclusion and Assessment of Women and
Minorities in Randomized Controlled Trials. Acad. Med. J. Assoc. Am. Med. Coll.
93, 630 –635 (2018).
31. Raz, L. & Miller, V. M. Considerations of sex and gender differences in preclinical
and clinical trials. Handb. Exp. Pharmacol . 127 –147. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-642-30726-3_7 (2012).
32. McGregor, A. J. Sex bias in drug research: a call for change. Pharmaceutical J.
https://www.pharmaceutical-journal.com/opinion/comment/sex-bias-in-drug-
research-a-call-for-change/20200727.article (2016).
33. Tower, J. Sex-speci ﬁc gene expression and life span regulation. Trends Endo-
crinol. Metab. 28, 735 –747 (2017).
34. Tharpe, N. Adverse drug reactions in women ’s health care. J. Midwifery Women ’s
Health 56, 205 –213 (2011).
35. Simon, V. Wanted: women in clinical trials. Science 308, 1517 –1517 (2005).
36. Light, K. P., Lovell, A. T., Butt, H., Fauvel, N. J. & Holdcroft, A. Adverse effects of
neuromuscular blocking agents based on yellow card reporting in the U.K.: are
there differences between males and females? Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Saf. 15,
151–160 (2006).
37. Oertelt-Prigione, S. The in ﬂuence of sex and gender on the immune response.
Autoimmun. Rev. 11, A479 –485 (2012).
38. Norman, J. L., Fixen, D. R., Saseen, J. J., Saba, L. M. & Linnebur, S. A. Zolpidem
prescribing practices before and after Food and Drug Administration required
product labeling changes. SAGE Open Med. 5, 205031211770768 (2017).
39. Franconi, F. & Campesi, I. Pharmacogenomics, pharmacokinetics and pharma-
codynamics: interaction with biological differences between men and women:
pharmacological differences between sexes. Br. J. Pharm. 171, 580 –594 (2014).
40. Miller, V. M., Rocca, W. A. & Faubion, S. S. Sex differences research, precision
medicine, and the future of women ’s health. J. Women ’s Health 2002 24,
969–971 (2015).
41. Schork, N. J. Personalized medicine: time for one-person trials. Nature 520,
609
–611 (2015).
42. Coravos, A., Khozin, S. & Mandl, K. D. Developing and adopting safe and effective
digital biomarkers to improve patient outcomes. Npj Digit. Med. 2, 14 (2019).
43. Sperling, R., Mormino, E. & Johnson, K. The evolution of preclinical Alzheimer ’s
disease: implications for prevention trials. Neuron 84, 608 –622 (2014).
44. Kourtis, L. C., Regele, O. B., Wright, J. M. & Jones, G. B. Digital biomarkers for
Alzheimer’s disease: the mobile/wearable devices opportunity. Npj Digit. Med. 2,
9 (2019).
45. Koran, M. E. I., Wagener, M., Hohman, T. J. & Alzheimer ’s Neuroimaging Initiative.
Sex differences in the association between AD biomarkers and cognitive
decline. Brain Imaging Behav . 11, 205 –213 (2017).
46. Snyder, C. W., Dorsey, E. R. & Atreja, A. The best digital biomarkers papers of
2017. Digit. Biomark. 2,6 4 –73 (2018).
47. Lipsmeier, F. et al. Evaluation of smartphone-based testing to generate
exploratory outcome measures in a phase 1 Parkinson ’s disease clinical trial:
remote PD testing with smartphones. Mov. Disord. 33, 1287 –1297 (2018).
48. Miller, I. N. & Cronin-Golomb, A. Gender differences in Parkinson ’s disease:
clinical characteristics and cognition: gender differences in Parkinson ’s disease.
Mov. Disord. 25, 2695 –2703 (2010).
49. Feiner, J. R., Severinghaus, J. W. & Bickler, P. E. Dark skin decreases the accuracy
of pulse oximeters at low oxygen saturation: the effects of oximeter probe type
and gender. Anesth. Analg. 105, S18 –23 (2007).
50. Reid, A. J. The Smartphone Paradox: Our Ruinous Dependency in the Device Age
(Springer International Publishing, 2018).
51. Rowntree, O. et al. GSMA The Mobile Gender Gap Report. https://www.gsma.
com/r/gender-gap/ (2020).
52. Fan, W. & Bifet, A. Mining big data: current status, and forecast to the future.
SIGKDD Explor Newsl. 14,1 –5 (2013).
53. Durinx, C. et al. Identifying ELIXIR core data resources. F1000Research 5,
ELIXIR–2422 (2016).
54. Bourne, P. E. et al. The NIH big data to knowledge (BD2K) initiative. J. Am. Med.
Inform. Assoc. 22, 1114 –1114 (2015).
55. Matoba, N. et al. GWAS of smoking behaviour in 165,436 Japanese people
reveals seven new loci and shared genetic architecture. Nat. Hum. Behav. 3
,
471–477 (2019).
56. Smoking prevalence and attributable disease burden in 195 countries and
territories, 1990 –2015. A systematic analysis from the Global Burden of Disease
Study 2015. Lancet Lond. Engl. 389, 1885 –1906 (2017).
57. Zore, T., Palafox, M. & Reue, K. Sex differences in obesity, lipid metabolism, and
inﬂammation— A role for the sex chromosomes? Mol. Metab. 15,3 5 –44 (2018).
58. Timmins, K. A., Green, M. A., Radley, D., Morris, M. A. & Pearce, J. How has big
data contributed to obesity research? A review of the literature. Int. J. Obes. 42,
1951–1962 (2018).
59. Frias-Martinez, V., Frias-Martinez, E. & Oliver, N. A gender-centric analysis of
calling behavior in a developing economy using call detail records. AAAI Spring
Symposium Series, North America. https://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/SSS/
SSS10/paper/view/1094/1347 (2010).
60. De Choudhury, M., Sharma, S. S., Logar, T., Eekhout, W. & Nielsen, R. C. Gender
and cross-cultural differences in social media disclosures of mental illness. In
Proc. 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social
Computing. (eds. Poltrock S. & Lee C. P.) 353 –369 (Association for Computing
Machinery, Portland, OR, USA, 2017).
61. Calvo, M. et al. In Sex-Speci ﬁcA n a l y s i so fCardiovascular Function . Vol. 1065
(eds Kerkhof, P. L. M. & Miller, V. M.) 181 –190 (Springer International Pub-
lishing, 2018).
62. Parikh, N. I. et al. Reproductive Risk Factors and Coronary Heart Disease in the
Women’s Health Initiative Observational Study. Circulation 133, 2149 –2158
(2016).
63. Wang, W. & Krishnan, E. Big data and clinicians: a review on the state of the
science. JMIR Med. Inform. 2, e1 (2014).
64. European Commission. Turning FAIR data into reality. (Publications Of ﬁce of the
European Union, 2018).
65. Harford, T. Big data: a big mistake? Signiﬁcance 11,1 4 –19 (2014).
66. Price, W. N. Big data and black-box medical algorithms. Sci. Transl. Med. 10,
eaao5333 (2018).
67. Podesta, J., Pritzker, P., Moniz, E. J., Holdren, J. & Zients, J. Big Data: Seizing
Opportunities, Preserving Values . (White House , Washington DC, 2014).
68. Liddy. Natural Language Processing. In Encyclopedia of Library and Information
Science (Marcel Decker, Inc., NY, 2001).
69. Poon, H., Quirk, C., DeZiel, C. & Heckerman, D. Literome: PubMed-scale genomic
knowledge base in the cloud.
Bioinformatics 30, 2840 –2842 (2014).
70. Sutherland, J. J. et al. Co-prescription trends in a large cohort of subjects predict
substantial drug-drug interactions. PLOS ONE 10, e0118991 (2015).
71. Lee, K. et al. Scaling up data curation using deep learning: an application to
literature triage in genomic variation resources. PLOS Comput. Biol. 14,
e1006390 (2018).
72. Miotto, R., Li, L., Kidd, B. A. & Dudley, J. T. Deep patient: an unsupervised
representation to predict the future of patients from the electronic health
records. Sci. Rep. 6, 26094 (2016).
73. Hirschman, L., Yeh, A., Blaschke, C. & Valencia, A. Overview of BioCreAtIvE: critical
assessment of information extraction for biology. BMC Bioinforma. 6, S1 (2005).
74. Larson, B. Gender as a Variable in Natural-Language Processing: Ethical Con-
siderations. In Proc. First ACL Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language Processing .
(eds Hovy, D., Spruit, S., Mitchell, M., Bender, E. M., Strube, M., Wallach, H.) 1 –11
(Association for Computational Linguistics, Valencia, Spain, 2017).
75. Garimella, A., Banea, C., Hovy, D. & Mihalcea, R. Women ’s Syntactic Resilience
and Men ’s Grammatical Luck: Gender-Bias in Part-of-Speech Tagging and
Dependency Parsing. In Proc. 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics . (eds Hovy, D., Spruit, S., Mitchell, M., Bender, E. M., Strube,
M., Wallach, H.) 3493 –3498 (Association for Computational Linguistics, Valencia,
Spain, 2019).
76. Wirth, M. et al. Sex differences in semantic processing: event-related brain
potentials distinguish between lower and higher order semantic analysis during
word reading. Cereb. Cortex 17, 1987 –1997 (2007).
77. Burman, D. D., Bitan, T. & Booth, J. R. Sex differences in neural processing of
language among children. Neuropsychologia 46, 1349 –1362 (2008).
78. Newman, M. L., Groom, C. J., Handelman, L. D. & Pennebaker, J. W. Gender
differences in language use: an analysis of 14,000 text samples. Discourse Pro-
cess. 45, 211 –236 (2008).
79. Koppel, M. Automatically categorizing written texts by author gender. Lit. Lin-
guist. Comput 17, 401 –412 (2002).
80. Thelwall, M. Gender bias in sentiment analysis. Online Inf. Rev. 42,4 5–57 (2018).
81. Kiritchenko, S. & Mohammad, S. M. Examining gender and race bias in two
hundred sentiment analysis systems. In Proc. Seventh Joint Conference on Lexical
and Computational Semantics . (eds Nissim, M., Berant, J., Lenci, A.) S18 –2005
(Association for Computational Linguistics, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, 2018).
82. Burgess, C., Kauth, M. R., Klemt, C., Shanawani, H. & Shipherd, J. C. Evolving sex
and gender in electronic health records. Fed. Pract. Health Care Prof. VA DoD.
PHS 36, 271 –277 (2019).
83. Oquendo, M. A. et al. Sex differences in clinical predictors of suicidal acts after
major depression: a prospective study.
Am. J. Psychiatry 164, 134 –141 (2007).
84. Miner, A. S. et al. Smartphone-based conversational agents and responses to
questions about mental health, interpersonal violence, and physical health.
JAMA Intern. Med. 176, 619 –625 (2016).
D. Cirillo et al.
9
Scripps Research Translational Institute npj Digital Medicine (2020)    81
85. Stubbs, M. Text and Corpus Analysis: Computer-assisted Studies of Language and
Culture. (Blackwell Publishers, 1996).
86. Mikolov, T., Yih, W. & Zweig, G. Linguistic regularities in continuous space word
representations. In Proc. 2013 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (eds
Vanderwende, L., Daumé, H. III., Kirchhoff, K.) 746 –751 (Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 2013).
87. Garg, N., Schiebinger, L., Jurafsky, D. & Zou, J. Word embeddings quantify 100
years of gender and ethnic stereotypes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115,
E3635–E3644 (2018).
88. Bolukbasi, T., Chang, K.-W., Zou, J., Saligrama, V. & Kalai, A. Man is to computer
programmer as woman is to homemaker? Debiasing Word Embeddings. In Proc.
30th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems . (eds Lee,
D. D., Luxburg, U. V., Garnett, R., Sugiyama, M., Guyon, I. M.). 4356 –4364 (NIPS,
Barcelona, Spain, 2016).
89. Sun, T. et al. Mitigating gender bias in natural language processing: literature
review. In Proc. 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (eds Nakov, P., Palmer, A.). 1630 –1640 (Association for Computational
Linguistics, Florence, Italy, 2019).
90. Jiwei Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Georgios Spithourakis, Jianfeng Gao, Bill
Dolan. A Persona-Based Neural Conversation Model. In Proc. 54th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Vol 1: Long Papers
( e d sE r k ,K . ,S m i t h ,N .A . )9 9 4–1003 (Association for Computational Linguistics,
Berlin, Germany, 2016).
91. Fitzpatrick, K. K., Darcy, A. & Vierhile, M. Delivering cognitive behavior therapy to
young adults with symptoms of depression and anxiety using a fully automated
conversational agent (Woebot): a randomized controlled trial. JMIR Ment. Health
4, e19 (2017).
92. Bakker, D., Kazantzis, N., Rickwood, D. & Rickard, N. A randomized controlled trial
of three smartphone apps for enhancing public mental health. Behav. Res. Ther.
109,7 5 –83 (2018).
93. Calvo, R. A. & D ’Mello, S. Frontiers of affect-aware learning technologies. IEEE
Intell. Syst. 27,8 6 –89 (2012).
94. Mirheidari, B., Blackburn, D., Walker, T., Reuber, M. & Christensen, H. Dementia
detection using automatic analysis of conversations. Comput. Speech Lang. 53,
65–79 (2019).
95. Kim, G. H. et al. Structural brain changes after traditional and robot-assisted
multi-domain cognitive training in community-dwelling healthy elderly. PLoS
ONE 10, e0123251 (2015).
96. Volpe, B. T. et al. Intensive sensorimotor arm training mediated by therapist or
robot improves hemiparesis in patients with chronic stroke. Neurorehabil. Neural
Repair 22, 305 –310 (2008).
97. Khan, A. & Anwar, Y. in Advances in Computer Vision. Vol. 944 (eds Arai, K. &
Kapoor, S.) 280 –292 (Springer International Publishing, 2020).
98. Kory-Westlund, J. M. & Breazeal, C. A Persona-Based Neural Conversation Model.
In Proc. 18th ACM Interaction Design and Children Conference (IDC ). (ed. Fails,
J. A.) 38
–50, (ACM Press, Boise, Idhao, US, 2019).
99. Logan, D. E. et al. Social robots for hospitalized children. Pediatrics 144,
e20181511 (2019).
100. Robertson, J. Gendering humanoid robots: robo-sexism in Japan. Body Soc. 16,
1–36 (2010).
101. Mavridis, N. et al. Opinions and attitudes toward humanoid robots in the Middle
East. AI Soc. 27, 517 –534 (2012).
102. Mavridis, N. et al. FaceBots: Robots utilizing and publishing social information in
Facebook. In 2009 4th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Interaction (HRI) 273–274 (2009).
103. Riek, L. D. & Ahmed, Z. Ibn Sina Steps Out: Exploring Arabic Attitudes Toward
Humanoid Robots. Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. New Front. Human – robot Interact. AISB
Leic. Vol. 1, (2010).
104. Søraa, R. A. Mechanical genders: how do humans gender robots? Gend. Technol.
Dev. 21,9 9 –115 (2017).
105. Deng, B. Machine ethics: the robot ’s dilemma. Nature 523,2 4 –26 (2015).
106. Holzinger, A., Biemann, C., Pattichis, C. S. & Kell, D. B. What do we need to build
explainable AI systems for the medical domain? Preprint at: https://arxiv.org/
abs/1712.09923 (2017).
107. Towards trustable machine learning. Nat. Biomed. Eng . 2, 709–710. https://www.
nature.com/articles/s41551-018-0315-x (2018).
108. De Fauw, J. et al. Clinically applicable deep learning for diagnosis and referral in
retinal disease. Nat. Med. 24, 1342 –1350 (2018).
109. Poplin, R. et al. Prediction of cardiovascular risk factors from retinal fundus
photographs via deep learning. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2, 158 –164 (2018).
110. Ma, J. et al. Using deep learning to model the hierarchical structure and function
of a cell. Nat. Methods 15, 290 –298 (2018).
111. Rajkomar, A., Hardt, M., Howell, M. D., Corrado, G. & Chin, M. H. Ensuring fairness
in machine learning to advance health equity. Ann. Intern. Med. 169, 866 –872
(2018).
112. Zemel, R., Wu, Y., Swersky, K., Pitassi, T. & Dwork, C. Learning fair representations.
In Proc. 30th International Conference on International Conference on Machine
Learning. Vol 28 III –325–III–333 (eds Dasgupta, S. & McAllester, D.) (JMLR.org,
Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 2013).
113. Dwork, C., Hardt, M., Pitassi, T., Reingold, O. & Zemel, R. Fairness through
awareness. In Proc. 3rd Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference
on - ITCS ’12 214–226 (eds Dasgupta, S. & McAllester, D.) (ACM Press, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA, 2012).
114. Mosca, L. et al. National Study of Physician Awareness and Adherence to Car-
diovascular Disease Prevention Guidelines. Circulation 111, 499 –510 (2005).
115. Daugherty, S. L. et al. Implicit gender bias and the use of cardiovascular tests
among cardiologists. J. Am. Heart Assoc . 6, e006872 (2017).
116. Hamburg, M. A. & Collins, F. S. The path to personalized medicine. N. Engl. J.
Med. 363, 301 –304 (2010).
117. Hanheide, M. et al. Robot task planning and explanation in open and uncertain
worlds. Artif. Intell. 247, 119 –150 (2017).
118. Amini, A., Soleimany, A., Schwarting, W., Bhatia, S. & Rus, D. Uncovering and
mitigating algorithmic bias through learned latent structure. In Proc. 2019 AAAI/
ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society. (eds Conitzer, V., Hadﬁeld, G. & Vallor, S.)
289–295 (Association for Computing Machinery, Honolulu, HI, USA, 2019)
119. Zhang, B. H., Lemoine, B. & Mitchell, M. Mitigating Unwanted Biases with
Adversarial Learning. In Proc. 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and
Society. (eds Furman, J., Marchant, G., Price, H. & Rossi, F.) 335 –340 (Association
for Computing Machinery, New Orleans, LA, USA, 2018)
120. Iacobacci, N. Exponential Ethics . (ATROPOS PRESS, 2018).
121. Can, A. I. Help reduce disparities in general medical and mental health care?
AMA J. Ethics 21, E167 –E179 (2019).
122. Suresh, H. & Guttag, J. V. A framework for understanding unintended con-
sequences of machine learning. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.10002
(2019).
123. Werling, D. M. & Geschwind, D. H. Sex differences in autism spectrum disorders.
Curr. Opin. Neurol. 26, 146 –153 (2013).
124. Stock, E. O. & Redberg, R. Cardiovascular disease in women. Curr. Probl. Cardiol.
37, 450 –526 (2012).
125. Xhyheri, B. & Bugiardini, R. Diagnosis and treatment of heart disease: are women
different from men? Prog. Cardiovasc. Dis. 53, 227 –236 (2010).
126. Dhruva, S. S., Bero, L. A. & Redberg, R. F. Gender bias in studies for food and drug
administration premarket approval of cardiovascular devices. Circ. Cardiovasc.
Qual. Outcomes 4, 165 –171 (2011).
127. Whose genomics? Nat. Hum. Behav . 3, 409. https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41562-019-0619-1 (2019).
128. Khramtsova, E. A., Davis, L. K. & Stranger, B. E. The role of sex in the genomics of
human complex traits. Nat. Rev. Genet. 20, 173 –190 (2019).
129. Coakley, M. et al. Dialogues on diversifying clinical trials: successful strategies for
engaging women and minorities in clinical trials. J. Women’s Health 21, 713–716
(2012).
130. Squires, K. et al. Insights on GRACE (Gender, Race, And Clinical Experience) from
the Patient ’s Perspective: GRACE Participant Survey. AIDS Patient Care STDs 27,
352–362 (2013).
131. Schott, A. F., Welch, J. J., Verschraegen, C. F. & Kurzrock, R. The national clinical
trials network: conducting successful clinical trials of new therapies for rare
cancers. Semin. Oncol. 42, 731 –739 (2015).
132. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. HIV Surveillance Report, 2017. 29,
(2018).
133. Bentley, A. R., Callier, S. & Rotimi, C. N. Diversity and inclusion in genomic
research: why the uneven progress? J. Community Genet. 8, 255 –266 (2017).
134. Barajas, A., Ochoa, S., Obiols, J. E. & Lalucat-Jo, L. Gender differences in indivi-
duals at high-risk of psychosis: a comprehensive literature review. Sci. World J.
2015,1 –13 (2015).
135. Cavagnolli, G., Pimentel, A. L., Freitas, P. A. C., Gross, J. L. & Camargo, J. L. Effect of
ethnicity on HbA1c levels in individuals without diabetes: systematic review and
meta-analysis. PLoS ONE 12, e0171315 (2017).
136. Bae, J. C. et al. Hemoglobin A1c values are affected by hemoglobin level and
gender in non-anemic Koreans. J. Diabetes Investig. 5,6 0 –65 (2014).
137. Buolamwini, J. & Gebru, T. Gender shades: intersectional accuracy disparities in
commercial gender classi ﬁcation. Conf. Fairness, Accountability Transparency 81,
77–91 (2018).
138. Obermeyer, Z., Powers, B., Vogeli, C. & Mullainathan, S. Dissecting racial bias in
an algorithm used to manage the health of populations. Science 366, 447 –453
(2019).
D. Cirillo et al.
10
npj Digital Medicine (2020)    81 Scripps Research Translational Institute
139. Gold, M. et al. Digital technologies as biomarkers, clinical outcomes assessment,
and recruitment tools in Alzheimer ’s disease clinical trials. Alzheimers Dement.
Transl. Res. Clin. Inter. 4, 234 –242 (2018).
140. Varela Casal, P. et al. Clinical validation of eye vergence as an objective marker
for diagnosis of ADHD in children. J. Atten. Disord. 23, 599 –614 (2019).
141. Ghosh, S. S., Ciccarelli, G., Quatieri, T. F. & Klein, A. Speaking one ’s mind: vocal
biomarkers of depression and Parkinson disease. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 139,
2193–2193 (2016).
142. Diagnosing respiratory disease in children using cough sounds 2 - ClinicalTrials.
gov. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03392363 (2018).
143. Zhan, A. et al. Using smartphones and machine learning to quantify Parkinson dis-
ease severity: the mobile Parkinson disease score.JAMA Neurol. 75, 876–880 (2018).
144. Barrett, M. A. et al. Effect of a mobile health, sensor-driven asthma management
platform on asthma control. Ann. Allergy Asthma Immunol. 119, 415 –421.e1
(2017).
145. Moreau, A. et al. Detection of nocturnal scratching movements in patients with
atopic dermatitis using accelerometers and recurrent neural networks. IEEE J.
Biomed. Health Inf. 22, 1011 –1018 (2018).
146. Picard, R. W. Improvement of a convulsive seizure detector relying on accel-
erometer and electrodermal activity collected continuously by a wristband.
MIT Media Lab . https://www.media.mit.edu/publ ications/improvement-of-a-
convulsive-seizure-detector-relying-on-accelerometer-and-electrodermal-
activity-collected-continuously-by-a-wristband/ (2016).
147. Halcox, J. P. J. et al. Assessment of Remote Heart Rhythm Sampling Using the
AliveCor Heart Monitor to Screen for Atrial Fibrillation: The REHEARSE-AF Study.
Circulation 136, 1784 –1794 (2017).
148. Commissioner, O. of the. FDA approves pill with sensor that digitally tracks if
patients have ingested their medication. FDA. http://www.fda.gov/news-events/
press-announcements/fda-approves-pill-sensor-digitally-tracks-if-patients-have-
ingested-their-medication (2018).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is written on behalf of the Women ’s Brain Project (WBP) ( www.
womensbrainproject.com/), an international organization advocating for women ’s
brain and mental health through scienti ﬁc research, debate and public engagement.
The authors would like to gratefully acknowledge Maria Teresa Ferretti and Nicoletta
Iacobacci (WBP) for the scienti ﬁc advice and insightful discussions; Roberto
Confalonieri (Alpha Health) for reviewing the manuscript; the Bioinfo4Women
programme of Barcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC) for the support. This work has
been supported by the Spanish Government (SEV 2015 –0493) and grant PT17/0009/
0001, of the Acción Estratégica en Salud 2013 –2016 of the Programa Estatal de
Investigación Orientada a los Retos de la Sociedad, funded by the Instituto de Salud
Carlos III (ISCIII) and European Regional Development Fund (ERDF). EG has received
funding from the Innovative Medicines Initiative 2 (IMI2) Joint Undertaking under
grant agreement No 116030 (TransQST), which is supported by the European Union ’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme and the European Federation of
Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations (EFPIA).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
A.S.C., N.M., S.C.S. and D.C. conceived the study. A.V., M.J.R., A.G. supervised the
project. All the authors contributed to the writing of the article, assisting with speci ﬁc
sections based on their expertise (E.G., Experimental and clinical data; S.C.S., C.M., S.M.,
Digital biomarkers; L.S., Big Data; D.C., Natural Language Processing; N.M., Robotics;
S.C.S., Explainable A.I.; D.C., Fairness).
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41746-020-0288-5.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to D.C.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article ’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2020
D. Cirillo et al.
11
Scripps Research Translational Institute npj Digital Medicine (2020)    81
