Improving Group Fairness in Knowledge Distillation
via Laplace Approximation of Early Exits
Edvin Fasth
EESC
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
edvinfa@kth.se
Sagar Singh
CSE
IIT Bombay
sagarsingh@cse.iitb.ac.in
Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) has become a powerful tool for training compact
student models using larger, pretrained teacher models, often requiring less data
and computational resources. Teacher models typically possess more layers and
thus exhibit richer feature representations compared to their student counterparts.
Furthermore, student models tend to learn simpler, surface-level features in their
early layers. This discrepancy can increase errors in groups where labels spuriously
correlate with specific input attributes, leading to a decline in group fairness even
when overall accuracy remains comparable to the teacher. To mitigate these chal-
lenges, Early-Exit Neural Networks (EENNs), which enable predictions at multiple
intermediate layers, have been employed. Confidence margins derived from these
early exits have been utilized to reweight both cross-entropy and distillation losses
on a per-instance basis.
In this paper, we propose that leveraging Laplace approximation-based meth-
ods to obtain well-calibrated uncertainty estimates can also effectively reweight
challenging instances and improve group fairness. We hypothesize that Laplace ap-
proximation offers a more robust identification of difficult or ambiguous instances
compared to margin-based approaches. To validate our claims, we benchmark our
approach using a Bert-based model on the MultiNLI dataset.
1 Introduction
Knowledge Distillation (KD) Hinton et al. [2015] offers a sample-efficient approach for training
a student model by leveraging a pretrained teacher model. The training loss for the student is a
combination of the standard cross-entropy loss calculated on the ground-truth labels and a knowledge
distillation (KD) loss that encourages the student’s predictions to align with the "soft targets"
provided by the teacher. Let D = ( xi, yi)N
i=1 represent the training dataset, Lstudent = (1 −
α)LCE (fs(xi), yi) + αLKD (fs(xi; T ), ft(xi; T )), with T being the temperature parameter usually
kept high during training. This process effectively transfers the teacher’s generalization capabilities
to the student. A significant advantage of KD is the flexibility to choose a student model with
significantly fewer parameters than the often computationally intensive teacher, thereby facilitating
easier deployment.
One issue identified in the original knowledge distillation paper is the occurrence of bias during
the training process. Since the student model learns from the teacher’s output probabilities, any
biases present in the teacher’s predictions can be inherited—or even amplified—by the student.
This becomes particularly problematic in settings where the teacher model has overfit to spurious
correlations in the data or exhibits imbalanced performance across subgroups. As a result, the
distillation process may unintentionally reinforce unfair or misleading patterns, highlighting the need
for strategies that account for such biases during student training.
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2505.01070v1  [cs.LG]  2 May 2025
Reweighting losses for spuriously correlated groups has been shown to improve group fairness
metrics. However, this approach typically requires prior knowledge of the group during training
and lacks adaptivity based on the student model’s current performance on challenging groups. To
address these limitations, Tiwari et al. Tiwari et al. [2024] observed that student models often exhibit
overconfidence on difficult instances in their early layers. They proposed utilizing Early-Exit Neural
Networks (EENNs) to obtain uncertainty estimates from these intermediate layers and subsequently
employing this information to dynamically reweight both the teacher’s distillation loss and the
student’s cross-entropy loss for each training sample.
Meronen et al. Meronen et al. [2024] proposed an alternative method for obtaining well-calibrated
uncertainty estimates from EENNs. Their approach treats the final layer of the classification heads
in early exit blocks as Bayesian parameters, employing Laplace approximations. This offers a
computationally efficient way to estimate the uncertainty associated with making a prediction at an
early exit. Furthermore, this method tends to yield high uncertainty for difficult instances, attributed
to potential model misspecification.
In this paper, we investigate whether this Laplace approximation-based uncertainty estimation in
early exit layers can be effectively used to reweight challenging training instances.
Section 1.1 outlines the work of Tiwari et al. Tiwari et al. [2024] as the primary motivation for our
approach. Section 2 details the Laplace approximation method used for uncertainty estimation. The
experimental setup and results are presented in Section 3. Finally, Section 5 provides concluding
remarks.
1.1 Related Works
Mediating Bias Using Early Readouts Our work closely builds upon the approach by Tiwari
et al. to mitigate featural bias in student models Tiwari et al. [2024]. To address the issue of bias
propagation during knowledge distillation, Tiwari et al. introduced the DEDIER model. Their method
adds the student model with an auxiliary network designed to estimate the confidence of early-layer
predictions. This auxiliary network generates instance-level uncertainty estimates, which are then
used to dynamically reweight the losses from training samples during distillation. They assign higher
weights to instances with low uncertainty predictions and thus overconfident instances in the early
exits, then multiply these weights with KD loss from the teacher and reduces the impact of potentially
biased or misleading data points. DEDIER thus introduces a more debiased training process that
maintains the student model’s efficiency and compactness while achieving improved performance on
classification tasks. The overall loss was given by:
Lstudent =
X
Dw
(1 − λ) · lce + λ · wt · lke
where wt = exp β.cm.α and cm(p) = pmax − maxpk∈p−pmax pk. The parameters β and α are
hyperparameters. While DEDIER offers a more robust framework compared to standard knowledge
distillation, it remains reliant on the accuracy of the auxiliary network’s confidence margins. This
dependency has been identified as a potential limitation. Specifically, within subgroups of the dataset
where classification performance is lowest, the prediction confidence margins tend to be higher than
the average confidence across the dataset, as illustrated in Figure 1. In the next section we’ll see how
to use laplace approximation as another approach towards uncertainty estimation in early exits and
how to use them for adjusting the loss function.
2 Laplace Approximation for uncertainty estimates
Identifying the need for better prediction of confidence margins, Meronen et al. Meronen et al. [2024]
targeted overconfidence and miscalibration in their intermediate classifiers. To do so, the paper
proposed a probabilistic framework that enhanced the uncertainty quantification at each exit point.
By applying last-layer Laplace approximations and model-internal ensembling, the model captured
both aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties more accurately. This led to improved calibration and more
trustworthy confidence scores, which in turn allowed for better decision-making under computational
budget constraints. The proposed method demonstrated superior performance on many benchmark
datasets (CIFAR-100, ImageNet, Caltech-256) across multiple metrics, including accuracy, negative
2
Figure 1: Confidence margin at different feature levels for the worst-performing group compared to
other groups in the original DEDIER paper.
log predictive density (NLPD), and expected calibration error (ECE), without retraining or significant
computational overhead.
The original DEDIER paper defines the confidence margin according to Eq. 2
pmax = max
pk∈P
pk (1)
cm(p) = pmax − max
pk∈P\{pmax}
pk (2)
This is used to re-weight the training samples for samples where the auxiliary network in the student
model does not produce the correct label, according to Eq. 3
wt =
(
1, if y(aux) = y
eβ·cm(p(aux))α
, otherwise (3)
Instead of learning point estimates for the parameters in the auxiliary network, we apply a Laplace
approximation over the final linear layer. Specifically, we approximate the posterior over the output
weights of the auxiliary network using the Bayesian update rule from Eq. 4:
p(θ | Dtrain) = p(Dtrain | θ) p(θ)R
p(Dtrain | θ) p(θ) dθ = [likelihood] × [prior]
[model evidence] (4)
In practice, we apply this approximation to the final weight matrix ˆWMAP of the auxiliary linear
classifier. Let ˆϕi denote the BERT feature vector (CLS token) for inputxi. The predictive distribution
over the logits zi is then:
p(zi | xi) = N

ˆW⊤
MAP ˆϕi, ˆϕ
⊤
i Σϕ ˆϕi · IC

(5)
Here, Σϕ is the empirical covariance of the feature vectors ˆϕi, and IC is the identity matrix over
output classes. The resulting variance term reflects uncertainty from both the features and the weight
posterior. The covariance Σϕ is computed as:
Σϕ = 1
N − 1
NX
i=1
( ˆϕi − ¯ϕ)( ˆϕi − ¯ϕ)⊤ (6)
3
To ensure numerical stability and positive-definiteness, we add a small ridge term to Σϕ as in the
Laplace approximation. Samples from the predictive distribution are drawn using Monte Carlo, and
the entropy of the resulting averaged softmax distribution is used to weight the loss function.
In order to make uncertainty predictions more accurate, we aim to integrate the work of Meronen et
al. into the original DeDIER model.
3 Experiments and results
3.1 Datasets
The MultiNLI dataset Williams et al. [2018] was used for classification. MultiNLI is a benchmark
dataset designed to evaluate a model’s ability to perform natural language inference (NLI), which
involves determining whether a given premise sentence entails, contradicts, or is neutral with respect to
a hypothesis sentence. The dataset encompasses examples from ten distinct genres of both written and
spoken English, including fiction, government reports, telephone conversations, and popular culture
articles, thus providing a diverse and challenging testbed for robust generalization. Each premise-
hypothesis pair is manually annotated and labeled as "entailment," "neutral," or "contradiction." This
dataset is widely adopted within the NLI research community and was also employed in the original
DeDiER paper, which facilitates direct benchmarking and comparison of results.
3.2 Model Architecture And Training
The model is based on the original DeDIER approach, with some important modifications made to
the confidence marings used in the auxiliary network.
Algorithm 1 The original DeDIER approach: learning student S given dataset D = {(xi, yi)}N
i=1
and teacher T .
Hyperparameters: Distillation loss fraction λ, early exit depth d, parameters α and β for weight
calculation.
1: S = h(gd(·)): split student into early layers gd of depth d and deeper layers h
2: Let haux(·) be the auxiliary network
3: Augment dataset D with weights:
Dw ← {(xi, yi, wti)}n
i=1, where wti = 1
4: for e = 1 to E do
5: Train student S using loss from Eq. 5
6: if e mod L = 0 then
7: Train haux(gd(·)) for R epochs on D using cross-entropy
8: for each (x, y, wt) ∈ Dw do
9: y(aux) ← haux(gd(x))
10: Update wt according to Eq. 4
11: end for
12: end if
13: end for
With Laplace implemented, this is our new version:
The major differences between DeDIER and our approach, except for the implementation of Laplace
Layer Approximaiton, can be listed as:
• The auxiliary reweighting is done in every layer, since we are only training the student on
five epochs and want to see the effect of the auxiliary network.
• The used auxiliary network is very simple, using only one layer. In our testing, last layer
and third layer was used for separate test cases.
4
Algorithm 2 DeDiER with auxiliary projector and Laplace margins on MultiNLI
Inputs: Teacher T , Student S, Projector haux, dataset D, hyperparameters α, β, number of epochs E.
1: Pre-train or load teacher model T on D
2: Initialize student S and auxiliary projector haux
3: for e = 1 to E do
4: for each minibatch (x, y, m) from D do
5: Compute features ϕ = TBERT(x) (CLS embedding)
6: Train projector haux using cross-entropy on (ϕ, y)
7: Compute logits z(aux) = haux(ϕ)
8: Compute Laplace covariance matrix Σ using haux and ϕ
9: Sample predictive distribution: p = Ez∼N (z(aux),Σ)[softmax(z)]
10: Compute entropy margin: H(p) = − P
j pj log pj
11: Compute weight w = exp(β · H(p)α)
12: Get teacher logits z(T ) = T (x)
13: Get student logits z(S) = S(x)
14: Compute KD loss: LKD = KLDiv(z(S), z(T ))
15: Compute CE loss: LCE = CE(z(S), y)
16: Total loss: L = w · LKD + LCE
17: Update student parameters via backprop on L
18: end for
19: end for
20: Save final student model and evaluate on test set
Models Used
• Teacher model: bert-base-uncased (12-layer BERT, hidden size 768)
• Student model: distilbert-base-uncased (6-layer DistilBERT, hidden size 768)
• Auxiliary network: One-layer linear classifier trained on the students third layer.
Optimization Hyperparameters
• Teacher fine-tuning
– Epochs: ET = 3
– Learning rate: 2 × 10−5
– Optimizer: AdamW
• Student training
– Epochs: ES = 5
– Learning rate: 2 × 10−5
– Optimizer: AdamW
– Distillation temperature: τ = 2.0
Training and Evaluation Details
• Batch size: 16
• Dataset: MultiNLI (via HuggingFace datasets)
• Evaluation: Accuracy and per-group performance (negation vs. non-negation)
• Tokenization: bert-base-uncased tokenizer with padding and truncation
• Learning rate scheduler: Linear schedule with warm-up
Evaluation Metrics
The model is evaluated using accuracy over numerous groups, compared to the accuracy of the
teacher model and the original DeDiER model. We also look at the confidence margins in the model
in different layers of the algorithm to better understand how the change affects the model.
5
4 Results
The results are presented in Table 1, Table, 2 Figure 2 and Figure 3.
4.1 Analysis
4.1.1 Improvement in Accuracy
Looking at the results of the tests, a small improvement in accuracy of the student model is shown
by the proposed approach compared to the original DeDIER model. This shows that the Laplace
transformation has potential to enhance the results.
Using a single-layer auxiliary network on the third of six layers was found to be more effective
than placing the auxiliary network on the final layer of the model. This observation aligns with the
argument that earlier layers tend to capture more fundamental and informative representations. As a
result, addressing the problem at an earlier stage may offer greater benefits by influencing the model’s
internal feature processing more directly Tiwari et al. [2024].
4.1.2 Changes in confidence margin
The confidence margins are generally lower than those reported in the original paper Tiwari et al.
[2024], as well as those of the teacher model when using the Laplace transformation. Even though
only one layer was used for auxiliary, the effect of the reweighting affects multiple layers in both test
cases.
While lower confidence margins can sometimes indicate increased model uncertainty—which may
be beneficial for calibration and avoiding overconfident incorrect predictions—they can also signal
weaker separation between correct and incorrect classes, potentially reducing model reliability.
Despite this ambiguity, the observed improvements in performance suggest that the approach holds
promise. The results indicate potential for further gains with continued refinement of the auxiliary
training and reweighting strategy.
4.2 Future Work
The Laplace transformation has shown potential to enhance the DeDIER model. However, to justify
the results and enable further improvements, additional testing is required.
4.2.1 More Advanced Auxiliary Layer
The auxiliary network used in this study is a simple, single-layer model. To further evaluate the
concept and assess the contribution of each layer in the network, a more sophisticated auxiliary
architecture should be explored. Meronen et al. Meronen et al. [2024] propose combining predictions
from auxiliary networks up to a given layer, as described in Eq. 7, where the weights wk represent
the computational cost in FLOPs up to classifier m. While accounting for computational cost may be
less important in the context of knowledge distillation, a similar approach for aggregating predictions
across multiple layers could still be evaluated.
pens
k (ˆyi | xi) = 1
Pk
l=1 wl
kX
m=1
wm pm(ˆyi | xi) (7)
4.2.2 More Datasets
The current experiments are limited to the MultiNLI dataset. To gain a deeper understanding of the
proposed model, it should be evaluated on additional datasets. Suitable datasets include Waterbirds,
Civil Comments, and CelebA, which were used in the original paper and would allow for direct
comparison. Moreover, the MultiNLI dataset itself offers further opportunities for analysis by
exploring alternative subgrouping strategies when assessing worst-group performance.
6
4.2.3 Hyperparameter Fine tuning
Further work is needed to tune the hyperparameters of the proposed approach. This includes adjusting
the number of training epochs, temperature parameters in the Laplace transformation, and the
weighting scheme.
Metric Teacher Student (Aux layer 3) Student (Aux layer 6) Group
Average Accuracy 0.845 0.835 0.832 All
Table 1:
Results of Dedier with Laplace
Metric Teacher Student
Final Test Accuracy 0.841 0.830
Table 2:
Original DEDIER performance with same teacher
(a) Auxiliary network on layer 3
 (b) Auxiliary network on layer 6 (last layer)
Figure 2: Confidence margins per layer on worst group predictions and all predictions
(a) Auxiliary network on layer 3
 (b) Auxiliary network on layer 6 (last layer)
Figure 3: Confidence margins in student and teacher on the predictions that were wrong
5 Conclusion
We conclude that Laplace-based approximation for early exit layers is a cheap yet effective way
to compute uncertainty estimates from early layers, which can be used to reweight the KD loss in
student models and make their predictions less reliant on simple features.
7
References
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.
Lassi Meronen, Martin Trapp, Andrea Pilzer, Le Yang, and Arno Solin. Fixing overconfidence in
dynamic neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter conference on applications of
computer vision, pages 2680–2690, 2024.
Rishabh Tiwari, Durga Sivasubramanian, Anmol Mekala, Ganesh Ramakrishnan, and Pradeep
Shenoy. Using Early Readouts to Mediate Featural Bias in Distillation. In 2024 IEEE/CVF
Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), pages 2626–2635, Waikoloa, HI,
USA, January 2024. IEEE. ISBN 9798350318920. doi: 10.1109/W ACV57701.2024.00262. URL
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10484228/.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel R Bowman. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for
sentence understanding through inference. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, V olume 1 (Long Papers), pages 1112–1122. Association for Computational Linguistics,
2018.
A Appendix / supplemental material
A.1 Code
The code used can be found on https://github.com/addvinf/DEDIER-with-Laplace/tree/
main
8
